DR. 28.7.2022 106

Tuan Gobind Singh Deo [Puchong]: Tuan Yang di-Pertua, ada peraturan
mesyuarat, Tuan Yang di-Pertua. Tuan Yang di-Pertua, kalau kita lihat kepada Peraturan
Mesyuarat 60 yang menjadi peraturan mesyuarat yang dipakai sekarang, ia merujuk kepada
report from select committee. Sekiranya laporan itu telah pun direcommitted, perkataan
digunakan ‘recommitted’, maka ada disebut di situ Peraturan Mesyuarat 60(4) terpakai.
Peraturan Mesyuarat 60(4) menyatakan, “A Committee of the whole House upon a Bill
recommitted...”

Tuan Yang di-Pertua: Tadi itu Peraturan berapa?

Tuan Gobind Singh Deo [Puchong]: Sorry, 60(4).

Tuan Yang di-Pertua: 60(4).

Tuan Gobind Singh Deo [Puchong]: Yes Sir. | am sorry, you got that 60(4).

Tuan Yang di-Pertua: Oh! Okey.

Tuan Gobind Singh Deo [Puchong]: So, kalau kita lihat 60(1), “When a Bill has
been reported from a Select Committee, the House shall proceed to consider the Bill as
reported from the Select Committee upon a motion ...” and a motion dinamakan di situ. Then
of course 60(2), “If that motion is agreed to without amendment, the House may proceed to
the third reading of the Bill as reported from the Select Committee.”

01710

Tuan Yang di-Pertua: Motion yang kita lulus tadilah.

Tuan Gobind Singh Deo [Puchong]: That was not the third reading. That was a
second reading.

Tuan Yang di-Pertua: Ya.

Tuan Gobind Singh Deo [Puchong]: That was a second reading. The records will
show that, Tuan Yang di-Pertua. Then, we have (4), which talk about, “A Committee of the
whole House upon a Bill recommitted under the provisions of this Order shall proceed in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (2) or (3) of Standing Order 59”.

So, Standing Order 59, Tuan Yang di-Pertua, takes us back— Standing Order 59(2)
says, “When the whole Bill has been recommitted, the Committee shall go through the Bill as
provided in Standing Order 57”. And Standing Order 57, Tuan Yang di-Pertua, requires us to
go through each of the provisions as we do with all Bills. Provision 57 of the Standing Order.
That is when we go into Jawatankuasa, and then Tuan Yang di-Pertua becomes a Pengerusi
and all that. | am just concern, Tuan Yang di-Pertua, because we have not done that.

So, ordinarily there is three stages. Second reading, then after that, it goes to
Jawatankuasa. Second reading, | stand corrected, untuk second reading, you need two third.
Jawatankuasa, not necessary. And then finally the third reading, you need two third again.

We have not gone through the process of Jawatankuasa when we refer to each fasal
individually. So, | am just seeking guidance, Tuan Yang di-Pertua.

Tuan Yang di-Pertua: Ya, all right. Tadi sebenarnya ada dua bahagian. Satu, usul
untuk memperkenankan Penyata Special Select Committee. ltu sudah kita undi tadi.

Bersuara sahaja, tidak perlu two-third.
