DR.28.10.2021 59

was made. Now, | propose a relook into this so as to comply with what was designed at
the Formation of Federation of Malaysia and that is to reinstate the title ‘Chief Justice of
Sabah and Sarawak' from the current title of ‘Chief Judge of Sabah and Sarawak’.

Tuan Yang di-Pertua, the requirements also untuk some sort of autonomy in terms
of fiscal control dalam High Court of Sabah and Sarawak mesti juga dihalusi di peringkat
Pusat kerana there millions of ringgits collected from Sarawak and Sabah High Courts
dan their subordinate courts seperti section dan magistrate court di mana duit ini dihantar
ke Federal and you can see the allocation of funds kepada High Court of Sabah and
Sarawak is very little.

In fact, one example adalah the mobile court in Sabah, di mana our learned
judges, majistret mereka melaksanakan the Registration of Birth and Deaths Ordinance
where they help National Registration Department untuk mendaftar birth certificate di
Sabah but they don’t have any funding. | think this is an issue that needs to be addressed
in Sabah so that the service to the people by our learned judges as well as High Court, as
well the Chief Justice of Sabah and Sarawak dapat melaksanakan yang terbaik untuk to
overcome the fake birth certificates that are being issued and the many crimes committed
with abuses of power with the registration of birth.

So, fundings to mobile court are extremely needed and | urge the Federal
Government to allocate special allocation of funds bagi High Court of Sabah and Sarawak
so that they can dispense justice for the people of Sabah and Sarawak. Before | end as
well, the separation of the Attorney General Office dan juga judiciary di Sabah where
crossovers happen. [Tidak jelas] magistrates after serving a long time as well as section
court dipindah kepada AG office sebagai DPP.

Maybe this is not something that should be practiced anymore sebab kita punya
magistrate and section courts have been trained to dispense justice, mores o on laws in
Borneo and suddenly they become DPP and vice-versa. | think the High Court of Sabah
and Sarawak, the Chief Justice of Sabah and Sarawak should be given the power to
decide on transfers or inter-transfers within the judiciary.

Yang Berhormat Menteri, another one is the use of English in the High Court of
Sabah and Sarawak must be defended and this is one of the foundation of our courts. |
believe that we should give more training kepada DPP’s dan juga magistrate dan juga
Section Court who have very tough challenges in English, but we need to maintain this.
More so dengan undang-undang yang akan digubal berkenaan dengan Artifical
Intelligence, the internet and all other laws related to cyber which are all scientific, at the
same time very English-related.

[Dato’ Sri Azalina Othman Said mempengerusikan Mesyuarat]

This is not to be parochial, but we must honor the spirit and letter of the Formation
of Federation of Malaysia. Nor is it to put down any other language and | believe that with
the fundings the Federal Government can do, Yang Berhormat Menteri can push this for
us while you make changes to the Federal Constitution in equalizing Sabah and Sarawak.

Terima kasih dan saya sokong dengan pindaan ini.

Dato’ Sri Azalina Othman Said [Pengerang]: Terima kasih Yang Berhormat
Penampang. Sepatutnya semua dalam bahasa Malaysia kecuali dengan kebenaran
ataupun perbahasan.

Datuk Ignatius Darell Leiking [Penampang]: Sudah minta izin awal daripada
Tuan Yang di-Pertua. Sebelum...

Dato’ Sri Azalina Othman Said [Pengerang]: Patut beritahu saya. Yang
Berhormat Tuaran.
