112 DR.06.10.2021

sekiranya syarikat-syarikat membuat pelaburan terhadap produktiviti dan pekerja-pekerja
mereka. Jadi apakah pandangan Yang Berhormat Menteri tentang ini? Terima kasih.

Timbalan Yang di-Pertua [Dato’ Mohd Rashid Hasnon]: Terima kasih Yang
Berhormat Subang. Sila Yang Berhormat Menteri.

Datuk Dr. Hajah Zuraida binti Kamaruddin: Memang, betul. Dalam SOP yang
dibenarkan yang kita ambil pekerja-pekerja asing ini, living quarters mereka must be
comply with KKM and MKN punya SOP. So, they will go down to the ground and make
sure they check, they comply and then baru boleh get the approval. That is one.

But secondly also it is high time for KPPK to develop a policy on plantation
housing. Since | came from KPKT last time so therefore now | am applying the housing
policy to the plantation estates as well. So it will be more organized and at least there is a
standard that they need to adhere to.

So, then with regards to incentives. At the moment whichever company that
bought any jentera, machinery outside, we give them 20 percent rebate, so 20 percent
discount something like that — we give back 20 percent to them. So that is the incentive
but at the same time we already form one committee called MACCOPS. So, MACCOPS
is a committee where the ses money is given to this MACCOPS of RM30 million for this
year and the government also give a matching grant of RM30 million. So these are the
money they used to do research and come out with some mechanization to improve the
harvesting job, dengan izin Tuan Yang di-Pertua.

Timbalan Yang di-Pertua [Dato’ Mohd Rashid Hasnon]: Ya.

Datuk Dr. Hajah Zuraida binti Kamaruddin: The harvesting job in the ladang.
So, at the moment, they have come up with Cantas. Cantas is to harvest the fruits. We
have Cantas Electro, the electrical one and we have the grabber where it is like a tractor
where they grab all those buah tandan. Now we also have another one that | just met with
the CM of Sarawak | think about three weeks ago. So, Sarawak is also coming out with
one mechanization with regards to harvesting the sawit. So, it is drone on drone basis and
in eight months time according to them it will be ready to be commercialised. So, this is
also another one of the mechanization that is in place to help the sawit industry.

Tuan Wong Chen [Subang]: Yang Berhormat Menteri, cadangan saya ialah
tentang insentif untuk perumahan ataupun improvement perumahan pekerja-pekerja
ladang sebab the main complaints from the NGOs adalah housing mereka tidak baik,
makanan tak cukup, perubatan tak ada. Jadi bagi saya, saya rasa industri itu cukup kaya
tapi kalau ia melabur RM4 bilion kepada keseluruhannya bolehkah kita bagi sedikit insentif
kepada pelaburan tersebut?

Datuk Dr. Hajah Zuraida binti Kamaruddin: The plantation players, the big
players got no problem with the housing. Now all housing is in order and they follow the
SOP. We got no problem. For plantations, no issue because they have individual houses.
In fact, the families semua ada dekat situ, no issue.

So, probably Yang Berhormat talking about the small holders where they are not
really organized. So, this is another approach yang KPPK akan laksanakan is to cluster
them and manage them in clusters so it will be more effective and more organized and
more structured. We want to formalized them. So, this is all in place to impove the situation
because during this COVID-19 time we learned a lot. So, we have to do it, so that to
prepare ourselves for a better Malaysia, insya-Allah in the coming years.

So, with regards to Yang Berhormat Kluang — just now is it Yang Berhormat
Kluang that stands?

Timbalan Yang di-Pertua [Dato’ Mohd Rashid Hasnon]: Bukan, Yang
Berhormat Petaling Jaya.

Datuk Dr. Hajah Zuraida binti Kamaruddin: Yang Berhormat Petaling Jaya.
Yang Berhormat Kluang ada sini? Yang Berhormat Kluang.

Timbalan Yang di-Pertua [Dato’ Mohd Rashid Hasnon]: Tak ada.
